OSSM-11013 [DOCS] Review and update Egress docs for ambient mode (#100884)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-kubernetes-gateway-api-ambient-mode.adoc

// This procedure is used in the following assembly:
// * service-mesh-docs-main/gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-gateway-kubernetes-gateway-api-ambient-mode_{context}"]
= Directing egress traffic through a gateway using the {k8s} Gateway API in ambient mode

[role="_abstract"]
Use the {k8s} Gateway API and waypoint proxy to direct outbound HTTP traffic through an egress gateway.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the {SMProduct} Operator version 3.2 or later.

* You configured the `Istio` and `IstioCNI` resources with ambient profile.

* You have created a `Ztunnel` resource.

.Procedure

> . Optional: Enable the {k8} Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). 

Reviewer: Check if the value of this attribute {k8} in the sentence "Optional: Enable the {k8} Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs)."  is supposed to be published as is in the preview?

+
[NOTE]
====
As of {k8s} 1.28 and {ocp-product-title} 4.18 or earlier version of {product-title}, the {k8s} Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and you must install the CRDs before you can use them. {ocp-product-title} 4.19 and later versions install the CRDs by default.
====

. Create a namespace called `egress-gateway` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace egress-gateway
----

> . Apply the ambient mode label to the namespace by running the following command:

Reviewer: Can we add the name of the label in this sentence, like you've done in the previous statement, to maintain consistency?

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace egress-gateway istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

. Create a YAML file named `egress-se.yaml` that defines the `ServiceEntry`.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: httpbin-ext
  namespace: egress-gateway
  labels:
    istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint
spec:
  hosts:
  - httpbin.org
  ports:
  - number: 80
    name: http
    protocol: HTTP
  resolution: DNS
----

.. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f egress-se.yaml
----

> .. Create a YAML file named `waypoint.yaml` that creates a waypoint proxy in `egress-gateway` namespace similar to the following example:

Reviewer: Create a YAML file named `waypoint.yaml` to define a waypoint proxy in the `egress-gateway namespace`, as shown in the following example

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: waypoint
  namespace: egress-gateway
  labels:
    istio.io/gateway-for: service
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
----

.. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f waypoint.yaml
----

[NOTE]
====
As an alternate to creating the `waypoint.yaml` YAML file, you can also set up waypoint proxy by running the following command:
[source,terminal]
----
$ istioctl waypoint apply --enroll-namespace --name waypoint --namespace egress-gateway
----
When you use the `--enroll-namespace` option, all services in the `egress-gateway` namespace (including `ServiceEntries`), will route their traffic through the waypoint.
====

.Verification

. Verify the status of the gateway configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io waypoint -n egress-gateway
----
+

> The `PROGRAMMED` column shows `True` when the configuration succeeds, similar to the following example:

Author: Ignoring this comment as the same language is used and approved throughout the OSSM 3 guides.

// This procedure is used in the following assembly:
// * service-mesh-docs-main/gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-gateway-kubernetes-gateway-api-ambient-mode_{context}"]
= Directing egress traffic through a gateway using the {k8s} Gateway API in ambient mode

Use the {k8s} Gateway API and waypoint proxy to direct outbound HTTP traffic through an egress gateway.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the {SMProduct} Operator version 3.2 or later.

* You configured the `Istio` and `IstioCNI` resources with ambient profile.

* You have created a `Ztunnel` resource.

.Procedure

. Optional: Enable the {k8} Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). 
+
[NOTE]
====

> As of {k8s} 1.28 and {ocp-product-title} 4.18 or earlier version of {product-title}, the {k8s} Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and you must enable the CRDs before you can use them. {ocp-product-title} 4.19 and later versions enable the CRDs by default.

Reviewer 2: Instead of using "... enable the CRDs", should we use "...install the CRDs"?

====

. Create a namespace called `egress-gateway` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace egress-gateway
----

. Apply the ambient mode label to the namespace by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace egress-gateway istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

> . Create a YAML file named `egress-gateway-cr.yaml` that defines the egress gateway.

Reviewer 2: We are creating a ServiceEntry and HTTPRoute in the yaml below and not the egress gateway. Please rephrase the sentence as follows.

```suggestion
. Create a YAML file named `se-httproute.yaml` that defines the ServiceEntry along with the HTTPRoute.
```

// This procedure is used in the following assembly:
// * service-mesh-docs-main/gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-gateway-kubernetes-gateway-api-ambient-mode_{context}"]
= Directing egress traffic through a gateway using the {k8s} Gateway API in ambient mode

Use the {k8s} Gateway API and waypoint proxy to direct outbound HTTP traffic through an egress gateway.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the {SMProduct} Operator version 3.2 or later.

* You configured the `Istio` and `IstioCNI` resources with ambient configuartions.

* You have created a `Ztunnel` resource.

.Procedure

. Optional: Enable the {k8} Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). 
+
[NOTE]
====

> As of {k8s} 1.28 and {ocp-product-title} 4.18 or earlier version of {product-title}, the {k8s} Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and you must enabled the CRDs before you can use them. {ocp-product-title} 4.19 and later versions enable the CRDs by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of {k8s} 1.28 and {ocp-product-title} 4.18 or earlier version of {product-title}, the {k8s} Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and you must enable the CRDs before you can use them. {ocp-product-title} 4.19 and later versions enable the CRDs by default.
```

====

> .. Create a YAML file named `gateway-cr.yaml` that enables the Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs similar to the followinge example:

Author: I will remove the optional tag from here and let the content (which is optional) be as a note. Do I also need to change it in here: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.1/html-single/gateways/index#ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-kubernetes-gateway-api_ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway. (this is an existing documentation)

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: bookinfo-gateway
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio
  listeners:
    - name: http
      port: 80
      protocol: HTTP
      allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: Same

---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: bookinfo
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
    - name: bookinfo-gateway
  rules:
    - matches:
        - path:
            type: Exact
            value: /productpage
        - path:
            type: PathPrefix
            value: /static

>         - path:

Reviewer 3: I dont think so but it is already in https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.1/html/gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway#ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-kubernetes-gateway-api_ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway
So I didnt want to change the old documentation but add to it since I dont know why it is already there.

>         - path:

Author: Removing the example YAML.

$ oc label namespace egress-gateway istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

. Create a YAML file named `egress-gateway-cr.yaml` that defines the egress gateway.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: httpbin-ext
  namespace: egress-gateway
spec:
  hosts:
  - httpbin.org
  ports:
  - number: 80
    name: http
    protocol: HTTP
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  resolution: DNS
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: httpbin-egress-gateway
  namespace: egress-gateway
  annotations:
    networking.istio.io/service-type: ClusterIP
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio
  listeners:
  - name: http
    hostname: httpbin.org
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httpbin-egress-route
  namespace: egress-gateway
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: httpbin-egress-gateway
  hostnames:
  - httpbin.org
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: httpbin.org
      port: 80
----

.. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f egress-gateway-cr.yaml
----

> .. Create a YAML file named `waypoint.yaml` that creates a waypoint proxy in `istio-egress` namespace similar to the followinge example:

Reviewer 3: This is right. We can show the alternative istioctl command:
@shreyasiddhartha you can add an alternative step for setting up waypoint proxy:
`istioctl waypoint apply --enroll-namespace --name waypoint --namespace egress-gateway common-infrastructure`
